====================
Custom Boards How-To
====================

As explained in :doc:`../quickstart/configuring`, supported boards (also known
as "in-tree" boards) are configured using a standard syntax:

    .. code-block:: console

      $ cd nuttx
      $ ./tools/configure.sh -l board-name:config-name
        Copy files
        Select CONFIG_HOST_LINUX=y
        Refreshing...

Sometimes it is not appropriate, or not wanted, to add a new or custom board to
the NuttX boards tree itself. If so, the board can be defined out-of-tree in a
custom directory and still be built easily.

Add a Custom Board
==================

The same set of files as provided for in-tree boards is required (i.e. configs,
Kconfig, scripts, etc.) but these can be placed in a directory of your choice.

In this example, the files are assumed to exist in:
 ``../nuttx/CustomBoards/MyCustomBoardName``

    .. code-block:: console

      $pwd
      /home/nuttx/nuttx
      $ ls -1 ../CustomBoards/MyCustomBoardName
      configs
      helpers
      include
      Kconfig
      scripts
      $ ls ../CustomBoards/MyCustomBoardName/configs
      nsh
      MyCustomConfig
      $

At this stage, the contents of the files is not important. The notable exception to this
is file named ``defconfig``, which is stored in the directory ``MyCustomConfig`` (see
the listing above.)

This file is autogenerated and should not be edited manually. However, it should also
not be copied blindly from an existing board as the values within are incorrect
for the custom board. This causes an issue because the configure script called below
is supposed to create some symbolic links in the NuttX source tree and it is using
the contents of the ``defconfig`` file for that. Since the file does not exist,
configure script will fail which prevents the user from creating the ``defconfig``
file automatically.

As a workaround, a minimal ``defconfig`` file needs to be provided. See an example
for AVR architecture:

    .. code-block:: kconfig

      CONFIG_ARCH="avr"
      CONFIG_ARCH_AVR=y
      CONFIG_ARCH_BOARD_CUSTOM=y
      CONFIG_ARCH_BOARD_CUSTOM_DIR_RELPATH=y
      CONFIG_ARCH_BOARD_CUSTOM_DIR="../CustomBoards/MyCustomBoardName/"
      CONFIG_ARCH_BOARD_CUSTOM_NAME="MyCustomBoardName"
      CONFIG_ARCH_CHIP="avrdx"

This minimal file should be sufficient for the configure script to succeed. Additional
changes can be made using ``make menuconfig`` and proper ``defconfig`` file can then
be generated using ``make savedefconfig``.

To build the custom board, alter the contents of the example above to fit your
architecture and chip, then use this syntax, which is slightly different
from in-tree boards and configs:

    .. code-block:: console

      $ ./tools/configure.sh -l ../CustomBoards/MyCustomBoardName/configs/MyCustomConfig
      Copy files
      Select CONFIG_HOST_LINUX=y
      Refreshing...

Kconfig Settings
================

Once the board is configured, to ensure subsequent builds run correctly, there
are two Kconfig settings that need to be set. These are:

:menuselection:`Board Selection --> Custom Board Configuration --> Custom Board Name`

:menuselection:`Board Selection --> Custom Board Configuration --> Relative custom board directory`

They should be set to suit your board name and directory location.

.. Note::
   If you subsequently run a ``make distclean`` operation, then these settings will be lost.
   They should be added back before building, and/or before running ``make menuconfig``.

Kconfig flags
-------------

Some boards make using of Kconfig ``ARCH_HAVE_*`` flags in order to be able to
select certain features. For example, ``ARCH_HAVE_LEDS`` is a necessary flag for
enabling ``CONFIG_ARCH_LEDS=y`` because it tells the build system that the board
has LEDs. Selecting ``ARCH_HAVE_*`` flags happens inside the NuttX build
system, so it is not accessible to custom boards. If you need to enable these
flags, then you should select them manually with the ``BOARD_CUSTOM_*`` options:

* ``BOARD_CUSTOM_LEDS`` selects ``ARCH_HAVE_LEDS``
* ``BOARD_CUSTOM_BUTTONS`` selects ``ARCH_HAVE_BUTTONS``
* ``BOARD_CUSTOM_IRQBUTTONS`` selects ``ARCH_HAVE_IRQBUTTONS``
* ``BOARD_CUSTOM_INTERRUPT`` selects ``ARCH_PHY_INTERRUPT``

If there are any other ``ARCH_HAVE_*`` selectors you cannot access but need for
your custom board, please open an issue!

Kconfig file
------------

You may have noticed that in-tree boards typically surround their board-level
Kconfig logic with something like:

.. code:: kconfig

   if ARCH_BOARD_BOARDNAME
   endif # ARCH_BOARD_BOARDAME

You should **not** do this for custom boards; just write your Kconfig logic
without the guard. However, it is still good practice to prefix your custom
Kconfig options with the board name:

.. code:: kconfig

   config BOARDNAME_MYOPTION
       bool "My custom option"
       default n
       ---help---
           This is my custom option for my custom board.
