.. _make_build_system:

=================
Make Build System
=================

Currently, NuttX supports both CMake and Make build systems.
This guide explains the NuttX `make`-based build system.

Due to *requirements, constraints, and the complexity of the build process*, NuttX divides
this work into multiple files, each handling specific parts of the build process.

As stated in :doc:`/introduction/inviolables`, multiple platforms should be supported:

- :ref:`win_mk`: handles windows platform support.
- :ref:`unix_mk`: handles unix-like platforms support.

NuttX supports multiple build modes. See :doc:`protected_build`:

- :ref:`flatlibs_mk`: Kernel and user-space built into a single `blob`.
- :ref:`protectedlibs_mk`: Kernel and user-space built as two separate `blobs`.
- :ref:`kernelibs_mk`: Kernel built into single `blob`. User apps must be loaded 
  into memory for execution.

NuttX targets multiple libs, or `silos`, each handling its own compilation:

.. note::

    Gregory Nutt has a nice presentation about
    `NuttX architecture <https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/pages/viewpage.action?
    pageId=139629399&preview=/139629402/140774623/nuttx-3-archoverview.pdf>`_

    There the `silo` concept is explained. Only the `silos` there are listed below as libs.
    The build mode influences the needed libs.

.. code-block:: console

  $ ls -l staging/
  drwxr-xr-x  2 xxx xxx    4096 Oct  6 16:02 .
  drwxr-xr-x 27 xxx xxx    4096 Oct  6 16:02 ..
  -rw-r--r--  1 xxx xxx  323640 Oct  6 16:02 libapps.a
  -rw-r--r--  1 xxx xxx  384352 Oct  6 16:02 libarch.a
  -rw-r--r--  1 xxx xxx   62182 Oct  6 16:02 libbinfmt.a
  -rw-r--r--  1 xxx xxx    6468 Oct  6 16:01 libboards.a
  -rw-r--r--  1 xxx xxx 2820054 Oct  6 16:02 libc.a
  -rw-r--r--  1 xxx xxx  161486 Oct  6 16:01 libdrivers.a
  -rw-r--r--  1 xxx xxx  981638 Oct  6 16:02 libfs.a
  -rw-r--r--  1 xxx xxx  224446 Oct  6 16:02 libmm.a
  -rw-r--r--  1 xxx xxx 2435746 Oct  6 16:01 libsched.a
  -rw-r--r--  1 xxx xxx   51768 Oct  6 16:02 libxx.a

Verbosity
---------

The ``V`` variable can be passed to ``make`` to control the build verbosity.

- **Quiet (Default):** The build output is minimal.
- **Verbose (`V=1 V=2`):** Shows the full compiler commands *(enables command echo)*.
- **Verbose Tools (`V=2`):** Enables verbose output for tools and scripts.

.. code-block:: console

  # V=1,2: Enable echo of commands
  $ make V=1

  # V=2:   Enable bug/verbose options in tools and scripts
  $ make V=2

Build Process
-------------

.. note::

  Most of the configuration step documentation and adjacent tooling should be
  documented separately. Most of what is presented here will be moved.

The ``Make`` based build process starts with the NuttX tree configuration.
This is done by running ``tools/configure.sh`` script.

During configuration, some symlinks are created.

- the "current" chip directory gets symlinked to ``nutt/include/arch/chip``.
- the "current" board directory gets symlinked to ``nutt/include/arch/board``.
- the "current" arch directory gets symlinked to ``nutt/include/arch``.

Each board should also supply an ``scripts/Make.defs`` file.
The board ``Make.defs`` file should:

- include the complete .config file.
- include the :ref:`config_mk`
- include the arch-specific toolchain.
- set the linker file used for linking. (``LDSCRIPT``)
- set the compiler flags needed for the board.

The board config is stored as ``defconfig`` file, which is a minimal config,
storing only the configs that differs from default config values. 
Due to NuttX's particularity of strict dependance to the ``app``
directory, the ``.config`` file is not generated by either ``kconfiglib`` or
``kconfig-frontends``, but rather by the an in-tree ``tools/process_config.sh``
script. This script take a "base" input file (the boards ``defconfig`` file),
additional include paths (the most relevant being the ``apps`` top directory),
and generate an output file (the ``$(TOPDIR)/.config`` file).

.. code-block:: bash

  # part of configure.sh shell script, starting at line 240
  #
  # src_config=${configpath}/defconfig
  # dest_config="${TOPDIR}/.config"
  # original_config="${TOPDIR}/.config.orig"
  # backup_config="${TOPDIR}/defconfig"

  $ ln -sf ${src_makedefs} ${dest_makedefs} || \
    { echo "Failed to symlink ${src_makedefs}" ; exit 8 ; }
  $ ${TOPDIR}/tools/process_config.sh -I ${configpath}/../../common/configs \
    -I ${configpath}/../common \
    -I ${configpath} -I ${TOPDIR}/../apps \
    -I ${TOPDIR}/../nuttx-apps \
    -o ${dest_config} ${src_config}

Starting the Build
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The root **Makefile** is the build process entrypoint. Its main job is
to check for a ``.config`` file and include the appropriate **host-specific Makefile**.
The "actual" first steps of the build process are handled by the host-specific
**Makefile** (either ``Win.mk`` or ``Unix.mk``).

Early on, during parsing, both host-specific **Makefile** will also include

- board's ``Make.defs`` file mentioned above. this will include also
  - the main ``.config`` file.
  - the tools ``config.mk`` file.
  - the arch ``toolchain.defs`` file.
- based on the build mode, one of the following files:
  - :ref:`flatlibs_mk`
  - :ref:`protectedlibs_mk`
  - :ref:`kernelibs_mk`
- :ref:`directories_mk`

Built-in dependency mechanism
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. note::

	The documentation for :ref:`mkdeps` should be extended. Lots of details
	are missing. Part of the documentation here should be moved.

NuttX implements a built-in dependency mechanism. See :ref:`mkdeps`.
This mechanism is kick-started by the ``depend`` target, which in turn
triggers ``pass1dep`` and ``pass2dep``. 

.. code-block:: makefile

  pass1dep: context tools/mkdeps$(HOSTEXEEXT) tools/cnvwindeps$(HOSTEXEEXT)
  	$(Q) for dir in $(USERDEPDIRS) ; do \
  	  $(MAKE) -C $$dir depend || exit; \
  	done  
  pass2dep: context tools/mkdeps$(HOSTEXEEXT) tools/cnvwindeps$(HOSTEXEEXT)
  	$(Q) for dir in $(KERNDEPDIRS) ; do \
  	  $(MAKE) -C $$dir EXTRAFLAGS="$(KDEFINE) $(EXTRAFLAGS)" depend || exit; \
  	done

Both targets will the ``depend`` target in each of the directories listed in the
``$(USERDEPDIRS)`` and ``$(KERNDEPDIRS)`` variables, respectively.
See :ref:`directories_mk`.

The dependency mechanism runs before the final target.

Building NuttX libs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The host-specific **Makefile** will not build the required NuttX libs.
It will deffer work by "recursively" calling make in each of the directories
listed in the ``$(USERLIBS)`` and ``$(NUTTXLIBS)`` variables.

Final target, pass1 & pass2
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The final NuttX binary is always generated by running both ``pass1`` and ``pass2`` targets, although
the actual dependencies of the mentioned targets may vary depending on the build mode.

The different NuttX build modes will not influence the "execution" of the ``pass1`` and ``pass2`` targets,
but rather will influence the dependencies pulled by those targets.

- ``pass1`` target depends on the ``$(USERLIBS)``.
- ``pass2`` target depends on the ``$(NUTTXLIBS)``.

.. code-block:: 

  all: pass1 pass2

  pass1: $(USERLIBS)
  pass2: $(NUTTXLIBS)

The content of the ``$(USERLIBS)`` and ``$(NUTTXLIBS)`` variables is defined in each build mode makefile.
See :ref:`build_modes` above.


.. _win_mk:

Win.mk
------

Although targeting different platforms, both **Win.mk** and **Unix.mk** aim to produce
the same output. The need for independent files is due to the differences in the
platform's approaches.

forward vs back slashes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

One of the main differences is the use of forward slashes
(``/``) on unix-like platforms versus backslashes (``\``) on windows

${HOSTEXEEXT} ${HOSTDYNEXT}
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

These variables are used by the build system to configure the executable suffix required
by the used platform. They are defined in :ref:`config_mk`.

For windows platform:

- ``${HOSTEXEEXT}`` is set to ``.exe``.
- ``${HOSTDYNEXT}`` is set to ``.dll``.

Symbolic Linking
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

For the windows platform, the build system handles symbolic links differently.

The differences and drawbacks of the windows platform are explained in 
:ref:`build_system_linking`.

.. _unix_mk:

Unix.mk
-------

Versioning
^^^^^^^^^^

The build system will impact versioning if NuttX is cloned as a repo. See :ref:`versioning`.

config.h .config mkconfig
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

NuttX's build system defers the ``config.h`` generation to a separate tool called
``mkconfig``. See :ref:`makefile_host`.

.. code-block:: makefile

  tools/mkconfig$(HOSTEXEEXT): prebuild
	    $(Q) $(MAKE) -C tools -f Makefile.host mkconfig$(HOSTEXEEXT)

The ``include/nuttx/config.h`` recipe calls the ``mkconfig`` executable generated by the
rule above to create the ``config.h`` file from the current ``.config`` file.

Symlinks & dirlinks
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Dirlinks are symbolic links that allow the build system to use generic paths while pointing
to architecture-specific, chip-specific, or board-specific directories. This enables a single 
build system workflow across many different hardware configurations.

- Symlink ``arch/<arch-name>/include`` to ``include/arch``
- Symlink ``boards/<arch>/<chip>/<board>/include`` to ``include/arch/board``
- Symlink ``arch/<arch-name>/include/<chip-name>`` to ``include/arch/chip``
- Symlink ``boards/<arch>/<chip>/<board>`` to ``arch/<arch-name>/src/board/<board>``

.. note::

  Some boards make use of a ``common`` directory. In that case:

  - ``boards/<arch>/<chip>/common`` is symlinked to ``arch/<arch-name>/src/bb oard``
  - ``boards/<arch>/<chip>/<board>`` is symlinked to ``arch/<arch-name>/src/board/<board>``

- Symlink ``arch/<arch-name>/src/<chip-name>`` to ``arch/<arch-name>/src/chip``

The ``.dirlinks`` file itself is just a timestamp marker that indicates all dirlinks have been 
created.

Dummies
^^^^^^^

The main reason for the use of dummies is to handle some specific scenarios, such as external
code bases, custom chips and boards or to overcome tooling limitations. If any of the features below
are not used, the build system will fallback to a dummy.

- **${EXTERNALDIR}**

  Possible values for ``$(EXTERNALDIR)`` are ``external`` or ``dummy``.
  
  NuttX code base can be extended by using ``$(TOPDIR)/external/`` directory.
  The build system searches for a ``Kconfig`` file in that directory. If found,
  the build system defines the ``EXTERNALDIR`` variable to ``external`` and also
  appends another lib (``libexternal``) to the build process.

  .. code-block:: makefile

    # External code support
    # If external/ contains a Kconfig, we define the EXTERNALDIR variable to 'external'
    # so that main Kconfig can find it. Otherwise, we redirect it to a dummy Kconfig
    # This is due to kconfig inability to do conditional inclusion.

    EXTERNALDIR := $(shell if [ -r $(TOPDIR)/external/Kconfig ]; then echo 'external'; else echo 'dummy'; fi)

- **dummy/Kconfig**

  The ``dummy/Kconfig`` is used to handle custom chips and boards.
    
  If in-tree chip/board is used, the build system will resolve to dummy_kconfig files.
  - ``$(CHIP_KCONFIG)`` is set to ``$(TOPDIR)$(DELIM)arch$(DELIM)dummy$(DELIM)dummy_kconfig``
  - ``$(BOARD_KCONFIG)`` is set to ``$(TOPDIR)$(DELIM)boards$(DELIM)dummy$(DELIM)dummy_kconfig``

  If custom chip/board is used, the build system will resolve to their custom paths.

  .. code-block:: makefile

    # Copy $(CHIP_KCONFIG) to arch/dummy/Kconfig

    arch/dummy/Kconfig:
    	@echo "CP: $@ to $(CHIP_KCONFIG)"
    	$(Q) cp -f $(CHIP_KCONFIG) $@

    # Copy $(BOARD_KCONFIG) to boards/dummy/Kconfig

    boards/dummy/Kconfig:
    	@echo "CP: $@ to $(BOARD_KCONFIG)"
    	$(Q) cp -f $(BOARD_KCONFIG) $@

- **boards/dummy.c**

  A special ``boards/dummy.c`` file is used by the build system to generate a useless object. 
  The purpose of the useless object is to assure that libboards.a/lib is created. Some archivers 
  (ZDS-II, SDCC) require a non-empty library or they will generate errors.

.. _build_modes:

Build Modes
^^^^^^^^^^^

As specified above, NuttX supports multiple build modes. The build mode is selected 
based on specific ``Kconfig`` options.

.. code-block:: makefile

  # Library build selections
  #
  # NUTTXLIBS is the list of NuttX libraries that is passed to the
  #   processor-specific Makefile to build the final NuttX target.
  # USERLIBS is the list of libraries used to build the final user-space
  #   application
  # EXPORTLIBS is the list of libraries that should be exported by
  #   'make export' is

  ifeq ($(CONFIG_BUILD_PROTECTED),y)
  include tools/ProtectedLibs.mk
  else ifeq ($(CONFIG_BUILD_KERNEL),y)
  include tools/KernelLibs.mk
  else
  include tools/FlatLibs.mk
  endif

The content of each file referenced above is documented in its own section.

- tools/ProtectedLibs.mk :ref:`protectedlibs_mk`
- tools/FlatLibs.mk :ref:`flatlibs_mk`
- tools/KernelLibs.mk :ref:`kernelibs_mk`

.. _config_mk:

Config.mk
---------

.. _flatlibs_mk:

FlatLibs.mk
-----------

placeholder

.. _protectedlibs_mk:

ProtectedLibs.mk
----------------

placeholder

.. _kernelibs_mk:

KernelLibs.mk
-------------

placeholder

.. _directories_mk:

Directories.mk
--------------

placeholder

.. _libtargets_mk:

LibTargets.mk
-------------

placeholder