=======
NAU7802
=======

Contributed by Daniel Byshkin.

The Adafruit NAU7802 is a high-resolution 24-bit ADC with an integrated load cell amplifier. It is designed for use with load cells and other sensors that require high precision and low noise measurements. The NAU7802 features a built-in programmable gain amplifier (PGA) that allows for easy calibration and adjustment of the sensor's output.

The driver uses the :doc:`uorb
</components/drivers/special/sensors/sensors_uorb>` interface.

Application Programming Interface
=================================

.. code-block:: c

   #include <nuttx/sensors/nau7802.h>

The NAU7802 registration function allows the driver to be registered as a UORB
driver. Registering this driver will cause the ``/dev/uorb/sensor_force<n>`` topic
to appear, where ``n`` is the value of ``devno``.

Registering the device in polling mode will create a kernel thread to poll the sensor

.. code-block:: c

   int err = nau7802_register(i2c_master, 0, 0x2a);
   if(err < 0){
     printf("Failed to register NAU7802: %d\n", err);
   }

The following are available commands for the NAU7802 driver:

``SNIOC_RESET``
----------------

Performs a reset of all registers on the NAU7802.

.. code-block:: c

   orb_ioctl(sensor, SNIOC_RESET);

``SNIOC_SET_GAIN``
------------------------

This command sets the gain of the NAU7802. The possible values are dictated by the
``nau7802_gain_e`` enum. The default value is 128x.

.. code-block:: c

   orb_ioctl(sensor, SNIOC_SET_GAIN, NAU7802_GAIN_128);

``SNIOC_SET_INTERVAL``
------------------------

This commands sets the polling interval of the NAU7802. The possible values are dictated by the
``nau7802_odr_e`` enum. The default value is 10HZ.

.. code-block:: c

   orb_ioctl(sensor, SNIOC_SET_INTERVAL, NAU7802_ODR_10HZ);

``SNIOC_SET_LDO``
------------------------

This command sets the LDO voltage of the NAU7802. The possible values are dictated by the
``nau7802_ldo_e`` enum. The default value is 3.0V.

.. code-block:: c

    orb_ioctl(sensor, SNIOC_SET_LDO, NAU7802_LDO_3V0);

``SNIOC_CALIBRATE``
------------------------

This commands performs one of the calibration procedures of the NAU7802. The possible calibration modes are:

 - NAU7802_CALMOD_INTERNAL: Removes internal PGA gain and offset errors.
 - NAU7802_CALMOD_OFFSET: Calibrates the zero point of the sensor. 
 - NAU7802_CALMOD_GAIN: Calibrates the max value of the sensor. 

.. code-block:: c

   orb_ioctl(sensor, SNIOC_CALIBRATE, NAU7802_CALMOD_INTERNAL);

For the gain calibration mode the user must place a known weight on the sensor. Unfortunately the NAU7802 records it as the maximum value, thus if your loadcell supports up to 100kg you shall put a 100kg weight on. 

A workaround would be to do a manual calibration by placing a smaller known weight and polling the sensor to get an average point, then using such point to offset the recorded values. An example is provided below.

.. code-block:: c

  #include "stdio.h"
  #include <errno.h>
  #include <fcntl.h>
  #include <nuttx/sensors/nau7802.h>
  #include <signal.h>
  #include <stdbool.h>
  #include <stdio.h>
  #include <stdlib.h>
  #include <sys/ioctl.h>
  #include <uORB/uORB.h>
  #include <unistd.h>

  int get_data(const struct orb_metadata *imu_meta, int imu, struct sensor_force *data) {
    int err = 0;
    bool update = false;
    err = orb_check(imu, &update);
    if (err < 0) {
        return err;
    }

    err = orb_copy(imu_meta, imu, data);
    if (err < 0) {
        return err;
    }
    return err;
  }

  int main(int argc, char **argv) {
    int err;
    int imu;
    char *name = "sensor_force0";

    const struct orb_metadata *imu_meta = orb_get_meta(name);
    if (imu_meta == NULL) {
        fprintf(stderr, "Failed to get metadata for %s\n", name);
        return EXIT_FAILURE;
    }

    imu = orb_subscribe(imu_meta);
    if (imu < 0) {
        fprintf(stderr, "Could not subsribe to %s: %d\n", name, errno);
        return EXIT_FAILURE;
    }

    struct sensor_force data;

    // flush 10 readings
    for (int i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
        err = get_data(imu_meta, imu, &data);
        if (err < 0) {
            printf("Error reading data\n");
        }
        usleep(100000); 
    }

    long zero_point = 0;
    for (int i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
        err = get_data(imu_meta, imu, &data);
        if (err < 0) {
            printf("Error reading data\n");
        } else {
            zero_point += data.force / 10;
        }
        usleep(100000); 
    }
    printf("Zero point: %ld\n", zero_point);

    printf("Place weigth on the sensor... you have 5 seconds from when you see this message\n");
    usleep(5000000);
    printf("Starting gain calibration\n");

    long weight_point = 0;
    for (int i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
        err = get_data(imu_meta, imu, &data);
        if (err < 0) {
            printf("Error reading data\n");
        } else {
            weight_point += data.force / 10;
        }
        usleep(100000);
    }
    printf("Weight value: %ld\n", weight_point);
    float known_weight_val = 15000; // 1.5kg

    while (true) {
        err = get_data(imu_meta, imu, &data);
        if (err < 0) {
            printf("Error reading data\n");
        } else {
            printf("Force: %.3f\n", known_weight_val * (data.force - zero_point) / (weight_point - zero_point));
        }
        usleep(50000);
    }

    orb_unsubscribe(imu);
    return EXIT_SUCCESS;
  }  



``SNIOC_GET_CALIBVALUE:``
----------------------------

This commands gets the gain calibration value when set by the ``SNIOC_CALIBRATE`` command. 

.. code-block:: c

    uint32_t cal_value;
    orb_ioctl(sensor, SNIOC_GET_CALIBVALUE, (unsigned long)&cal_value);


``SNIOC_SET_CALIBVALUE:``
---------------------------

This commands sets the gain calibration value, useful when you calibrated the sensor with the gain calibration mode once and want to reuse it later on.

.. code-block:: c

    uint32_t cal_value;
    orb_ioctl(sensor, SNIOC_SET_CALIBVALUE, cal_value);
